README.md, before:

# Menderer - Batch Mesh Renderer

**Menderer** is a simple OpenGL mesh renderer for batch rendering a 3D triangle mesh into a list of specified camera poses.
It supports meshes in [PLY (ascii or binary)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLY_(file_format)) format.
While various shadings (e.g. [Phong shading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phong_shading)) are implemented, there is currently no support for texture/normal maps.
The tool is written in C++ and can be executed as a standalone command line application.

If you find the Menderer source code useful in your research or project, please feel free to cite it as follows:
```
@misc{menderer,
  title = {Menderer - Batch Mesh Renderer},
  author = {Maier, Robert},
  howpublished = "\url{https://github.com/robmaier/menderer}",
  year={2019}
}
```


## Installation
The code was mostly developed and tested on Ubuntu Linux, hence we only provide the build instructions for Ubuntu in the following.
However, the code should also work on other platforms.

Please first clone the source code:
```
git clone https://github.com/robmaier/menderer.git
```

### Dependencies
Menderer requires
[CMake](https://cmake.org/download/),
[OpenCV 3](https://opencv.org/releases.html),
[Eigen](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/),
[CLI11](https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11/),
[GLFW3](https://www.glfw.org/),
[happly](https://github.com/nmwsharp/happly)
as third-party dependencies.
While Eigen, CLI11 and GLFW3 are already contained in the ```third_party``` folder, the other dependencies can be installed directly from the default Ubuntu repositories:
```
sudo apt install cmake libopencv-dev
```

### Build Menderer
To compile the Menderer application, use the standard CMake approach:
```
mkdir build
cd build/
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j6
```

## Run Menderer
In the following, we provide a simple usage example for the data in folder ```data/lion/```.
First, an output folder ```output/``` is created:
```
# go into data folder
cd ../data/lion/
# create output folder
mkdir output/
```

### Simple example
We render the mesh ```mesh.ply``` into a virtual camera, which is specified by the pinhole camera parameters in ```intrinsics.txt``` and the target pose in ```pose.txt```:
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -c intrinsics.txt -t pose.txt -m mesh.ply -o output/
```
Please check the rendered output image ```output/render_000000-color.png```.

Instead of having only a single target camera pose, it is also possible to render the mesh into a list of camera poses ```trajectory.txt``` ([TUM RGB-D Benchmark trajectory format](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/rgbd-dataset/file_formats)):
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -c intrinsics.txt -t trajectory.txt -m mesh.ply -o output/
```
Again, the output images ```render_xxxxxx-color.png``` are generated in the ```output/``` subfolder.


### Intrinsic3D format
In addition to the format above (```intrinsics.txt``` and ```pose.txt```/```trajectory.txt```) , we also support [Intrinsic3D dataset folders](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/intrinsic3d).
We show an example for downloading and rendering the *Intrinsic3D Tomb Statuary* data in the following:

```
# go into data/ folder again
cd ../
# create folder for dataset
mkdir tomb
cd tomb/
# create output/ folder
mkdir output/

# download, extract and rename mesh
wget https://vision.in.tum.de/_media/data/datasets/intrinsic3d/tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.zip
unzip tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.zip
mv tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.ply mesh.ply

# download, extract and rename rgbd (with intrinsics and poses)
wget https://vision.in.tum.de/_media/data/datasets/intrinsic3d/tomb-statuary-rgbd.zip
unzip tomb-statuary-rgbd.zip
mv tomb-statuary-rgbd rgbd
```

After preparing the dataset, we can batch-render the mesh into the provided input camera poses:
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -d rgbd/ -m mesh.ply -o output/
```

### Mesh format
Since Menderer can only load meshes from .ply files, we recommend [Meshlab](http://www.meshlab.net/) for converting meshes in other formats (e.g. .obj, .wrl, etc.) to the .ply format.


### Command line arguments
There are various command line options for the ```Menderer``` application in order to adjust the renderings and output options.
```
Input parameters (mandatory):
-c,--camera             Camera intrinsics filename (file must exist).
-t,--trajectory         Camera trajectory file in TUM RGB-D benchmark format (file must exist).
-d,--dataset"           Dataset folder in Intrinsic3D format (folder must exist).
                        Either both options -c and -t or just option -d must be specified.
-m,--mesh"              Input mesh file (file must exist).

Output parameters (optional):
-o,--output             Output folder (folder must exist and must be empty).
Output flags (optional, without arguments):
--save_depth_png        Save rendered depth (.png files) in output folder.
--save_depth_binary     Save rendered depth (.bin files) in output folder.

GUI flags (optional, without arguments):
--gui                   Show GUI for rendered color
--pause                 Pause after each frame (continue with any button/space)

Renderer parameters (optional):
--shader                OpenGL rendering shader (options: "none", 
                        "normals_phong" (default), "phong", "normals").
--color_r               Mesh color (red channel).
--color_b               Mesh color (blue channel).
--color_g               Mesh color (green channel).
--bg_r                  Rendering background color (red channel).
--bg_b                  Rendering background color (blue channel).
--bg_g                  Rendering background color (green channel).

Renderer flags (optional, without arguments):
--lighting      Enable lighting (default false).
--colored       Enable mesh colors (default false).
--flat          Enable flat rendering (default false, i.e. smooth).
```

### Example rendering modes
The following command line options demonstrate the use of implemented rendering modes:
```
1) Phong shading with normals as surface colors (default):
--shader phong_normals

2) Phong shading with uniform (gray) surface colors:
--shader phong --color_r 0.5 --color_g 0.5 --color_b 0.5

3) Render vertex colors without geometry/lighting:
--shader none --colored

4) Render normals (without Phong shading and geometry/lighting):
--shader normals
```


### Load exported depth in Matlab
When the ```--save_depth_binary``` flag is specified, the binary depth images ```render_xxxxxx-depth.bin``` are additionally generated in the ```output/``` subfolder.
The following code snippet shows how to load a binary depth map in Matlab (assumed the rendering resolution is 640x480).
```
% read file into matrix A
fileID = fopen('out_0.bin');
A = fread(fileID,[640, 480],'float');
fclose(fileID);
% permute dimensions (account for row-major/column-major)
A = permute(A,[2 1]);
% convert A to grayscale image
I = mat2gray(A);
% show image
imshow(I);
```


## License
The Menderer source code is licensed under the [GNU General Public License Version 3 (GPLv3)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html), please see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.


## Contact
If you have any questions, please contact [Robert Maier &lt;robert.maier@tum.de>](mailto:robert.maier@tum.de).

Commit message:

triangulate rendered frame and save generated mesh

README.md, after:

# Menderer - Batch Mesh Renderer

**Menderer** is a simple OpenGL mesh renderer for batch rendering a 3D triangle mesh into a list of specified camera poses.
It supports meshes in [PLY (ascii or binary)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLY_(file_format)) format.
While various shadings (e.g. [Phong shading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phong_shading)) are implemented, there is currently no support for texture/normal maps.
The tool is written in C++ and can be executed as a standalone command line application.

If you find the Menderer source code useful in your research or project, please feel free to cite it as follows:
```
@misc{menderer,
  title = {Menderer - Batch Mesh Renderer},
  author = {Maier, Robert},
  howpublished = "\url{https://github.com/robmaier/menderer}",
  year={2019}
}
```


## Installation
The code was mostly developed and tested on Ubuntu Linux, hence we only provide the build instructions for Ubuntu in the following.
However, the code should also work on other platforms.

Please first clone the source code:
```
git clone https://github.com/robmaier/menderer.git
```

### Dependencies
Menderer requires
[CMake](https://cmake.org/download/),
[OpenCV 3](https://opencv.org/releases.html),
[Eigen](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/),
[CLI11](https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11/),
[GLFW3](https://www.glfw.org/),
[happly](https://github.com/nmwsharp/happly)
as third-party dependencies.
While Eigen, CLI11 and GLFW3 are already contained in the ```third_party``` folder, the other dependencies can be installed directly from the default Ubuntu repositories:
```
sudo apt install cmake libopencv-dev
```

### Build Menderer
To compile the Menderer application, use the standard CMake approach:
```
mkdir build
cd build/
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j6
```

## Run Menderer
In the following, we provide a simple usage example for the data in folder ```data/lion/```.
First, an output folder ```output/``` is created:
```
# go into data folder
cd ../data/lion/
# create output folder
mkdir output/
```

### Simple example
We render the mesh ```mesh.ply``` into a virtual camera, which is specified by the pinhole camera parameters in ```intrinsics.txt``` and the target pose in ```pose.txt```:
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -c intrinsics.txt -t pose.txt -m mesh.ply -o output/
```
Please check the rendered output image ```output/render_000000-color.png```.

Instead of having only a single target camera pose, it is also possible to render the mesh into a list of camera poses ```trajectory.txt``` ([TUM RGB-D Benchmark trajectory format](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/rgbd-dataset/file_formats)):
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -c intrinsics.txt -t trajectory.txt -m mesh.ply -o output/
```
Again, the output images ```render_xxxxxx-color.png``` are generated in the ```output/``` subfolder.


### Intrinsic3D format
In addition to the format above (```intrinsics.txt``` and ```pose.txt```/```trajectory.txt```) , we also support [Intrinsic3D dataset folders](https://vision.in.tum.de/data/datasets/intrinsic3d).
We show an example for downloading and rendering the *Intrinsic3D Tomb Statuary* data in the following:

```
# go into data/ folder again
cd ../
# create folder for dataset
mkdir tomb
cd tomb/
# create output/ folder
mkdir output/

# download, extract and rename mesh
wget https://vision.in.tum.de/_media/data/datasets/intrinsic3d/tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.zip
unzip tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.zip
mv tomb-statuary-intrinsic3d.ply mesh.ply

# download, extract and rename rgbd (with intrinsics and poses)
wget https://vision.in.tum.de/_media/data/datasets/intrinsic3d/tomb-statuary-rgbd.zip
unzip tomb-statuary-rgbd.zip
mv tomb-statuary-rgbd rgbd
```

After preparing the dataset, we can batch-render the mesh into the provided input camera poses:
```
../../build/bin/Menderer -d rgbd/ -m mesh.ply -o output/
```

### Mesh format
Since Menderer can only load meshes from .ply files, we recommend [Meshlab](http://www.meshlab.net/) for converting meshes in other formats (e.g. .obj, .wrl, etc.) to the .ply format.


### Command line arguments
There are various command line options for the ```Menderer``` application in order to adjust the renderings and output options.
```
Input parameters (mandatory):
-c,--camera             Camera intrinsics filename (file must exist).
-t,--trajectory         Camera trajectory file in TUM RGB-D benchmark format (file must exist).
-d,--dataset"           Dataset folder in Intrinsic3D format (folder must exist).
                        Either both options -c and -t or just option -d must be specified.
-m,--mesh"              Input mesh file (file must exist).

Output parameters (optional):
-o,--output             Output folder (folder must exist and must be empty).
Output flags (optional, without arguments):
--save_depth_png        Save rendered depth (.png files) in output folder.
--save_depth_binary     Save rendered depth (.bin files) in output folder.
--save_mesh             Triangulate rendered depth and save generated mesh
                        as .ply file in output folder.

GUI flags (optional, without arguments):
--gui                   Show GUI for rendered color
--pause                 Pause after each frame (continue with any button/space)

Renderer parameters (optional):
--shader                OpenGL rendering shader (options: "none", 
                        "normals_phong" (default), "phong", "normals").
--color_r               Mesh color (red channel).
--color_b               Mesh color (blue channel).
--color_g               Mesh color (green channel).
--bg_r                  Rendering background color (red channel).
--bg_b                  Rendering background color (blue channel).
--bg_g                  Rendering background color (green channel).

Renderer flags (optional, without arguments):
--lighting      Enable lighting (default false).
--colored       Enable mesh colors (default false).
--flat          Enable flat rendering (default false, i.e. smooth).
```

### Example rendering modes
The following command line options demonstrate the use of implemented rendering modes:
```
1) Phong shading with normals as surface colors (default):
--shader phong_normals

2) Phong shading with uniform (gray) surface colors:
--shader phong --color_r 0.5 --color_g 0.5 --color_b 0.5

3) Render vertex colors without geometry/lighting:
--shader none --colored

4) Render normals (without Phong shading and geometry/lighting):
--shader normals
```


### Load exported depth in Matlab
When the ```--save_depth_binary``` flag is specified, the binary depth images ```render_xxxxxx-depth.bin``` are additionally generated in the ```output/``` subfolder.
The following code snippet shows how to load a binary depth map in Matlab (assumed the rendering resolution is 640x480).
```
% read file into matrix A
fileID = fopen('out_0.bin');
A = fread(fileID,[640, 480],'float');
fclose(fileID);
% permute dimensions (account for row-major/column-major)
A = permute(A,[2 1]);
% convert A to grayscale image
I = mat2gray(A);
% show image
imshow(I);
```


## License
The Menderer source code is licensed under the [GNU General Public License Version 3 (GPLv3)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html), please see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.


## Contact
If you have any questions, please contact [Robert Maier &lt;robert.maier@tum.de>](mailto:robert.maier@tum.de).
